testthat 3.2.0 (#657)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/testthat-3-2-0/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: testthat-3-2-0
title: testthat 3.2.0
date: 2023-09-27
author: Hadley Wickham
description: >
    Catch up on the last two years of testthat development with the latest
    minor release which includes new expectations, improved error snapshots,
    a new way to detect if a test has changed global state, and a handful of
    UI improvements.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/PtabTe6iJ_8
  author: Mika Baumeister

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package] 
tags: [testthat, devtools]
---

```{=html}
<!--
TODO:
* [x] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [x] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [x] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [x] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->
```

> We're chuffed to announce the release of [testthat](%7B%20home%20%7D) 3.2.0.

Reviewer: Link issue?

testthat makes it easy to turn your existing informal tests into formal, automated tests that you can rerun quickly and easily.
testthat is the most popular unit-testing package for R, and is used by almost 9,000 CRAN and Bioconductor packages.

> You can learn more about unit testing at [https://r-pkgs.org/tests.html](#0).

Reviewer: Link issue?

```

testthat 3.2.0 includes relatively few new features but there have been nine patch releases since testthat 3.1.0.
These patch releases contained a bunch of experiments that we now believe are ready for the world.
So this blog post summarises the changes in [3.1.1](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.1), [3.1.2](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.2), [3.1.3](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.3), [3.1.4](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.4), [3.1.5](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.5), [3.1.6](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.6), [3.1.7](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.7), [3.1.8](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.8), [3.1.9](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.9), and [3.1.10](https://github.com/r-lib/testthat/releases/tag/v3.1.10) over the last two years.

Here we'll focus on the biggest news: new expectations, tweaks to the way that error snapshots are reported, a new way to detect if a test has changed global state, and a handful of UI improvements.

```{r setup}
library(testthat)
```

## New expectations

> New `expect_contains()` and `expect_in()` that works similarly to `expect_true(all(expected %in% object))` or `expect_true(all(object %in% expected))` but give more informative failure messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New `expect_contains()` and `expect_in()` that work similarly to `expect_true(all(expected %in% object))` or `expect_true(all(object %in% expected))` but give more informative failure messages:
```

```{r, error = TRUE}
fruits <- c("apple", "banana", "pear")
expect_contains(fruits, "apple")
expect_contains(fruits, "pineapple")

x <- c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE, FALSE)
expect_in(x, c(TRUE, FALSE))
x <- c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE, NA, FALSE)
expect_in(x, c(TRUE, FALSE))
```

> New `expect_no_error()`, `expect_no_warning()`, and `expect_no_message()` make it easier (and clearer) to expect that code runs with without errors, warnings, or messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New `expect_no_error()`, `expect_no_warning()`, and `expect_no_message()` make it easier (and clearer) to expect that code runs without errors, warnings, or messages.
```

In particular, you'll no longer see the error class and you will now see the error call.

If you have used `expect_snapshot(error = TRUE)` in your package, this means that you will need to re-run and approve your snapshots.
We hope this is not too annoying and we believe it is worth it given the more accurate reflection of generated error messages.
This will not affect checks on CRAN because, by default, snapshot tests are not run on CRAN.

## State inspector

In times gone by it was very easy to accidentally change the state of the world in a test:

```{r}
#| eval: false
test_that("side-by-side diffs work", {
  options(width = 20)
  expect_snapshot(
    waldo::compare(c("X", letters), c(letters, "X"))
  )
})
```

When you look at a single test it's easy to spot the problem, and switch to a more appropriate way of temporarily changing the options, like `withr::local_options()`.
But sometimes this mistake crept in a long time ago and is now hiding amongst hundreds or thousands of tests.

In earlier versions of testthat, finding tests that accidentally changed the world was painful: the only way was to painstakingly review each test.

> Now you can use `set_state_inspector()` to register a function that's called before and after every test.

Reviewer 2: Do you want to say where to put the call to `set_state_inspector()`, i.e. in `tests/testthat/setup.R`?

> The function returns different values, testthat will let you know.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the function returns different values, testthat will let you know.
```

So, for example, to detect if any of your tests have modified options you could put the following in `tests/testhat/setup.R` or an existing helper file:

```{r}
set_state_inspector(function() {
  list(options = options())
})
```

> Or maybe you've an `R CMD check` warning that you've forgotten to close a connection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or maybe you've seen an `R CMD check` warning that you've forgotten to close a connection:
```

```{r}
set_state_inspector(function() {
  list(connections = nrow(showConnections()))
})
```

And you can of course combine multiple checks just by returning a more complicated list.

## UI improvements

> testthat 3.2.0 includes a bunch of minor user interface improvements that should make day-to-day use of testthat more enjoyable.

Reviewer: I faintly recall you saying that you believe parallel testing is now much more robust, do you want to mention it?

Reviewer 3: Indeed there weren't any changes in parallel testing from the first implementation AFAIR, except that it interacts better with snapshots now, and testthat deletes unneeded snapshots files.

Reviewer 4: I think the main parallel-related fix happened outside of testthat? IIRC there was an issue with processes sometimes getting stuck / left behind if you terminated `devtools::test()` while it was still trying to run tests.

Author: Mentioned both points.

Some of our favourite highlights are:

-   We use an improved algorithm to find the source reference associated with an expectation/error/warning/skip.
    We now look for the most recent call (within inside `test_that()` that has known source.
    This generally gives more specific locations than the previous approach and gives much better locations if an error occurs in an exit handler.

> -   Tracebacks are no longer truncated we uses rlang's default tree display; this should make it easier to track down problems when testing in non-interactive contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Tracebacks are no longer truncated and we use rlang's default tree display; this should make it easier to track down problems when testing in non-interactive contexts.
```

Here we'll focus on the biggest news: new expectations, tweaks to the way that error snapshots are reported, support for mocking, a new way to detect if a test has changed global state, and a bunch of smaller UI improvements.

```{r setup}
#| message: false
library(testthat)
```

## Documentation

The first and most important thing to point out is that the second edition of [R Packages](https://r-pkgs.org) contains updated and much expanded coverage of testing.
Coverage of testing is now split up over three chapters:

-   [Testing basics](https://r-pkgs.org/testing-basics.html)
-   [Designing your test suite](https://r-pkgs.org/testing-design.html)
-   [Advanced testing techniques](https://r-pkgs.org/testing-advanced.html)

> There's also a new vignette about special files (`vignette("special-files")`) which describes the various special files that you find in `tests/testthat` and when you might need to use them.

Reviewer 2: The vignette isn't auto-linking. Does it need the package to be specified?

Author: Probably not linking because isn't on CRAN yet? Hopefully will momentarily.

Author: Yes!

## New expectations

There are a handful of notable new expectations.
`expect_contains()` and `expect_in()` work similarly to `expect_true(all(expected %in% object))` or `expect_true(all(object %in% expected))` but give more informative failure messages:

```{r}
#| error: true
fruits <- c("apple", "banana", "pear")
expect_contains(fruits, "apple")
expect_contains(fruits, "pineapple")

x <- c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE, FALSE)
expect_in(x, c(TRUE, FALSE))
x <- c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE, NA, FALSE)
expect_in(x, c(TRUE, FALSE))
```

`expect_no_error()`, `expect_no_warning()`, and `expect_no_message()` make it easier (and clearer) to confirm that code runs without errors, warnings, or messages.

> The default fails if there is any error/warning/message, but you can optionally supply either the `message` or `class` arguments to confirm that a specific error/warning/message is no longer present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default fails if there is any error/warning/message, but you can optionally supply either the `message` or `class` arguments to confirm the absence of a specific error/warning/message.
```

    ```         
    Code
      f()
    Condition
      Error in `f()`:
      ! baz
    ```

If you have used `expect_snapshot(error = TRUE)` in your package, this means that you will need to re-run and approve your snapshots.
We hope this is not too annoying and we believe it is worth it given the more accurate reflection of generated error messages.
This will not affect checks on CRAN because, by default, snapshot tests are not run on CRAN.

## Mocking

Mocking[^1] is a tool for temporarily replacing the implementation of a function in order to make testing easier.
Sometimes when testing a function, one part of it is challenging to run in your test environment (maybe it requires human interaction, a live database connection, or maybe it just takes a long time to run).
For example, take the following imaginary function.
It has a bunch of straightforward computation that would be easy to test but right in the middle of the function it calls `complicated()` which is hard to test:

[^1]: Think mimicking, like a mockingbird, not making fun of.

```{r}
my_function <- function(x, y, z) {
  a <- f(x, y)
  b <- g(y, z)
  c <- h(a, b)
  
  d <- complicated(c)
  
  i(d, 1, TRUE)
}
```

> Mocking allows you to temporarily `complicated()` with something simpler, allowing you to test the rest of the function.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Mocking allows you to temporarily replace `complicated()` with something simpler, allowing you to test the rest of the function.
```
